[SPEAKER_00] I've kicked that thing like six times in my bed.
[SPEAKER_00] I'm like looking, I'm like rocks, water bottles that are bright.
[SPEAKER_00] It's going to be just like, who's that guy?
All right.
[SPEAKER_04] OK.
[SPEAKER_04] Cone this out a little bit.
[SPEAKER_03] There you go.
See?
There's water.
[SPEAKER_03] I'm not trying to shake you too much.
[SPEAKER_03] You're so close.
[SPEAKER_03] No.
[SPEAKER_04] That was much harder than that.
[SPEAKER_03] Yep, that was.
[SPEAKER_06] you can't tell they are genetically extinct.
[SPEAKER_06] We have two kinds of live in this area.
[SPEAKER_06] But the kind of find was renamed Cherokee black belly from black
[SPEAKER_03] which you might not learn how to access.
If it starts with a G, then that sounds like the librarian who doesn't know how to handle it.
So are they technically different speakers?
Which, do they interbreed?
I think that that answer
[SPEAKER_00] How are we defining species?
[SPEAKER_06] Biological species concept?
[SPEAKER_00] Talking that one back for evolution.
[SPEAKER_03] Love them but don't love them too much.
[SPEAKER_03] Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_03] Yeah.
[SPEAKER_03] Bye.
[SPEAKER_03] All right, is there any group who has not yet worked with staff?
Yes, yes.
[SPEAKER_03] Hmm.
[SPEAKER_03] Yeah.
[SPEAKER_03] There are certain kinds of data that we can just absorb, whether we have... A few kinds that we have found out for our dichotomy.
Let's take a quick informal poll.
[SPEAKER_03] Raise your hand if you've got... What numbers were the... The bag number one is...
[SPEAKER_03] Nine.
[SPEAKER_03] Nine we're pretty sure it was a seal.
[SPEAKER_03] And they are both larval, right?
[SPEAKER_03] Yes.
[SPEAKER_03] The kind of list we started our class with speaks about weight loss.
[SPEAKER_03] We didn't actually specify that a biotic survey could be part of that.
So we found salamanders, we found different types of salamanders.
[SPEAKER_03] So check the signs.
[SPEAKER_03] We want to also look at other signs.
[SPEAKER_03] This is the part where we get a little bit more into building our skills for our students to find their own right to answer questions.
[SPEAKER_03] So with your group of students, I'm going to give you a question here.
[SPEAKER_03] One of these index card questions.
[SPEAKER_03] Would you imagine students that write this question, they're really interested in answering it,
[SPEAKER_03] know how to start.
[SPEAKER_03] Your jobs work together with your buddy.
[SPEAKER_03] Try to figure out a way to move them.
[SPEAKER_03] What can ideas come up with as a protocol?
[SPEAKER_03] What are they actually going to measure?
[SPEAKER_03] How do you feel like you have a protocol that works?
[SPEAKER_03] Come talk to your Danny and figure out what kind of time and sort of process you'd like data
[SPEAKER_03] Protocol to determine.
[SPEAKER_05] So we would probably start by asking, what do you mean by impact?
[SPEAKER_00] What kind of impact?
[SPEAKER_00] Would be the number of species like we were looking for, total number.
[SPEAKER_00] So biodiversity versus just number of organisms would be how we would measure that.
[SPEAKER_00] Would it then be content also?
[SPEAKER_00] Like more rocky areas versus less?
[SPEAKER_00] I don't know if that's getting too much in the weeds.
[SPEAKER_00] Like if you're comparing two places, would it be that they have to be similar?
[SPEAKER_00] In my head, if I were to start encouraging, it'd be like, all right, well, is there a more traveled place?
[SPEAKER_00] Is there a left traveled place?
[SPEAKER_00] And how do we find a more traveled case we're going to be looking for?
[SPEAKER_00] You know, I just love life expectancy.
[SPEAKER_00] Like, what age you'd find them in.
[SPEAKER_00] Because I'd assume that if it were a negative impact, you'd find either all old, all youthful, or all young.
[SPEAKER_00] And I feel like if you were generally thriving, you might have all.
[SPEAKER_05] Stages of life Yeah, this is just how I think so if I'm just spitballing so I apologize I just I just kind of do that sometimes Yeah So
[SPEAKER_05] When I'm thinking about finding the more traveled versus the less traveled, do we look for a place where the trail crosses the stream and just assume it's more traveled, or do we need to measure that first?
[SPEAKER_00] Yeah, how do you measure crossed, crossing, if it's frequency or just
[SPEAKER_00] Yeah, what is frequency, right?
[SPEAKER_00] And like you said, is it this, or is it like further up the creek where there is no trail that's next to it?
[SPEAKER_00] I feel like we've just found like a million questions.
[SPEAKER_00] Yeah, exactly.
[SPEAKER_00] Which I'm sure just continues.
[SPEAKER_05] We have much research to do.
Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00] and mostly qualitative data to take.
[SPEAKER_05] Right.
[SPEAKER_05] All right.
[SPEAKER_05] So if we were going to do a protocol, what do you think, I feel like starting with just like maybe total number of salamanders and then looking at it
[SPEAKER_05] just at like a place where the trail crosses versus a place where the trail doesn't cross would be kind of the simplest starting point.
[SPEAKER_05] And then you can branch into these, okay, well, should we measure how much is it actually crossed?
[SPEAKER_05] And then once we figure out like total number, if that is effective, we can look at species diversity,
[SPEAKER_00] would it then be, how many you find is it like you spend a half hour and see how many you can find in a half hour?
[SPEAKER_00] In my head then it's just like, well, the less traveled one then, well, I mean, then it would be equally traveled, same amount of time, maybe having the same amount of pattern that you would take even though the creeks are like meander a little differently.
[SPEAKER_00] I'm thinking about, yeah, all the constants and the controls, I should say.
[SPEAKER_05] Next to the trail, because maybe, right, if it's next to the trail, there's still sound and all that kind of stuff, but we're not actually going through it, so maybe that would help keep things a little bit more consistent.
[SPEAKER_00] I would see a kid just being like, well, how would I even figure this out?
[SPEAKER_00] I'm like, in my head, I'm like pre-playing, just like, well, I have no idea.
[SPEAKER_00] How am I supposed to do this?
[SPEAKER_00] Well, what am I supposed to do?
[SPEAKER_00] I could just hear this, and I'm like, yeah.
[SPEAKER_00] I was like, yeah, sit with it.
[SPEAKER_05] I was like, I don't know.
[SPEAKER_05] if we're, you know, they're thinking about this question, having them focusing on a particular word, right, instead of this next question.
[SPEAKER_00] Well, yeah, figure, well, you gotta define the parameters, right?
[SPEAKER_00] And it's like, how can you take something so, like you said, and I'm repeating what you're saying back to you, because I totally agree with that.
[SPEAKER_00] It's defining impact, defining where you're at.
[SPEAKER_05] Yeah, kind of help them chunk it up into a little manageable task.
[SPEAKER_05] That's half of our job, right?
[SPEAKER_03] Maybe three quarters?
[SPEAKER_05] It's too big.
[SPEAKER_00] You can see that, if you look at my handwriting, you can read that better than mine.
[SPEAKER_00] We'll compare notes.
[SPEAKER_03] Let's see what that is.
[SPEAKER_03] We'll get check in.
[SPEAKER_00] Check in.
[SPEAKER_05] Okay, so we have two people crossing the stream in packed salamanders.
[SPEAKER_05] So we started by thinking about what does impact mean.
[SPEAKER_05] And so we felt like sort of the biggest category of that would just be total number of salamanders in that area.
[SPEAKER_05] So then we thought about how to define a more traveled versus less traveled.
[SPEAKER_05] And short of doing
[SPEAKER_05] finding a place, like with this train, is there a place where the trail crosses it?
[SPEAKER_05] And so if the trail crosses it, maybe we can assume that people tend to walk there, right?
[SPEAKER_00] Yeah, versus a place where people are... There's no trail, which would then be less traveled by people.
[SPEAKER_05] the other talked about number of species that we might find in those areas.
[SPEAKER_05] And then Tom brought up a good thought of looking at what kind of lifespan diversity do we find in this area?
[SPEAKER_01] Like, are we only finding young ones, or are we only finding old ones?
[SPEAKER_01] Well, that almost feels like two questions left.
[SPEAKER_01] Yeah.
[SPEAKER_07] for y'all's question is just that where the stream where the trail crosses the stream as far
[SPEAKER_07] How many salamanders have we found?
[SPEAKER_00] Ten?
[SPEAKER_06] Eight?
[SPEAKER_07] I think I've watched this movie.
[SPEAKER_00] I think this is where Bigfoot comes out
[SPEAKER_00] Yeah, regrets may have been had.
[SPEAKER_00] Not to be that guy, but I'm already seeing there's less water.
[SPEAKER_00] It's not flowing as much.
[SPEAKER_04] Aha.
[SPEAKER_03] But also, we all just trolled around.
[SPEAKER_00] Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00] So even this could be technically comparing less traveled than flowing water.
[SPEAKER_00] I feel less bad about this.
[SPEAKER_04] One.
[SPEAKER_04] It skidded right through.
[SPEAKER_04] Two.
[SPEAKER_04] A big one.
[SPEAKER_04] Oh, man.
[SPEAKER_04] Trump's around.
[SPEAKER_04] Yep.
[SPEAKER_04] Oh, good.
[SPEAKER_04] Three, four.
[SPEAKER_00] Five What's that?
[SPEAKER_00] Just connecting with animals
[SPEAKER_00] six seven these are big these ones are i i swear these are bigger yeah or like just anecdotally these bigger than the one we found seven
[SPEAKER_04] eight but a little bit buggier up here